Hello there.
This is Diamond de la Rue.
And welcome back.
Let's now look at variables.
We know that object state is represented by variables.
That is variables store state information like the student ID, student name and student gender.
So essentially variables are like containers that hold some data.
On some variables hold numeric data like student ID, while some others hold textual data like the student
name, and some may hold objects like the student object.
And we saw this when discussing class and object, and what a variable can hold is determined by the
data type of the variable.
So every variable has a data type associated with it.
And we saw this earlier when discussing Class An object and we can simply call this data type as a variable
type.
So if the type is end, it can hold numeric data like thousand.
And if the type is string, it can hold textual data like John.
Or if the type is a class name like student.
Then the variable can hold a student object.
In Java, a variable type is defined when the variable is first declared or created and that type cannot
be changed thereafter.
That is, the type is fixed, which means the variable can only hold that type of data.
And if you try to store some other type of data, then you get a compilation error.
For instance, if you say that a variable is of type and then you can only store integers in it, and
if you try to store a string in that variable, then you get a compilation error and soon we will see
this in our demo.
And due to this Java is referred to as a statically type language as the type of the variable is static
once defined, that is, it cannot be changed.
And the compiler ensures this and this type of checking performed during compilation is referred to
as static type checking.
So always keep in mind that Java is a statically type language.
Now in some languages like JavaScript, same variable can hold different types of data.
That is at one point in the program.
It may hold a numeric value while later, at some other point in the program, it may hold textual data.
And due to this, such languages are referred to as dynamic elite type languages as the type of the
variable is dynamic that is it is not constant anymore.
And the type checking in such languages is mostly done at runtime and therefore is referred to as dynamic
type chicken.
Now one main advantage of static type checking over dynamic type checking is that static type checking
allows earlier detection of programming mistakes.
That is, during compilation time itself, you will be able to find the mistakes.
For instance, if you assign a variable or a lateral of one type to a variable of another type, then
the compiler will report that it is an error and you can fix it.
So subsequently during the program execution, you will not have any issues, but with a dynamically
typed language, you will find the issue at runtime itself when you are executing the program and at
that point it is too late, so you would have to fix it.
And in the meanwhile your users might have bad experience in the resources section.
I will include some nodes which you can check out and it lists all the advantages of a statically type
language along with some interesting links.
You don't have to read it right away.
You can save that article or nodes and you can do it later when you are more comfortable with the language.
Now here we can see that a variable is holding either raw data like 1000, like in the case of ID or
is holding an object like in the case of variable SW.
If the variable holds raw data like thousand.
We refer to such a variable as primitive variable as the data it is holding is really primitive.
That is as basic as it can be, as primitive as it can be.
So variable ID is a primitive variable, whereas the variable that holds an object is referred to as
an object reference.
So the variable s is an object reference.
That is it is holding a reference to an object.
So it is actually not holding an object but a reference to an object.
But we will discuss that later.
So a variable can be a primitive or an object reference, and that is determined by the variables data
type.
And in Java there are eight primitive types and enter only one of them.
So if a variable has any of those eight primitive types, then it would be a primitive variable.
If the variable type is a class like student, then the variable will be an object reference and it
will also be an object reference.
If the variables type is something called an interface, an interfaces will be introduced after a few
sections here.
The variable name which is of type string, is also an object reference as string is a class n java.
So string is a class in the Java library and we will look at it later.
So it looks like a primitive as it does not have the new keyword, but internally it is an object reference.
That is, it holds a reference to a string object.
But more on that later.
Both primitive types and object references will be discussed later.
Now we know how a variable declaration looks like.
But let's look at it in a more formal way.
And declaring a variable involves stating the variable type followed by the variable name, and it can
be optionally initialized with something called a literal or an expression.
Here equal to symbol is referred to as an assignment operator as it assigns the value on its right to
the variable on its left.
And literal is simply raw data.
And these are a few example declarations involving literals.
In the first example, we are declaring an integer variable called ID, which is initialized with the
literal thousand.
In the second example, we are declaring a boolean variable called flag, which is initialized with
the literal true and boolean is another primitive like int.
And the third example we are declaring a string variable called name which is initialized with the literal
John.
So all of these are literals and an expression is something that gets evaluated to a single value.
And let's look at a few examples.
Here.
An integer variable ID is initialized with another variable called x.
The variable x is an expression and the value it holds will be assigned to the variable ID.
So X would have been declared somewhere earlier in the program.
So when the program is executing and when this statement executes, X would have some value and that
value gets assigned to the variable ID.
So you can see the difference between literal and expression.
Literal is just a value like 1000 and needs no further computation.
Whereas an expression involves computation.
In this case, computation would be to take the value of X and assign it to ID.
And this example, the expression is X plus Y, where X and Y are two variables.
So during program execution, the values that X and Y hold will be added and the result is assigned
to the variable ID.
And here the expression is the student object creation part, which at runtime creates a student object
and assigns it to the variable as.
And such kind of declarations are referred to as declaration statements.
So they are a type of statements.
And declaration statements can appear anywhere in a class.
And soon we will see this in our demo.
So we have looked at variable declaration, but often we would want to change the value assigned to
a variable.
That is, the variable would have been initialized during variable declaration.
But later on in the program we would want to reassign the variable with a different value.
In fact, the term variable itself suggests that it is something whose value can be changed.
And an assignment statement is used to change the variable value.
Earlier we have seen the declaration statement.
And here is the syntax of an assignment statement.
It is similar to a declaration statement, but without the variable type as the type has already been
defined in the declaration statement.
And here are two example assignment statements one with the literal and the other with an expression.
Not that such assignment statements cannot appear at class level.
That is, they cannot appear directly within the body of a class.
They can appear inside members of a class such as methods.
And we would get a compilation error if we try to declare them directly within the body of a class.
And we will also see this in our demo in the next lecture.
So that's about it.
That's a short introduction to variables.
A variable is simply a container, and what it holds depends on its data type.
Keep in mind that Java is a statically type language.
Next, we will write a simple program and test everything we have seen in this lecture.
Thank you.